2.4 Phonotactic Constraints
Phonotactic constraints refer to, among other things, the structural restrictions on what
forms a well-formed syllable in a particular language. For instance, although “pight”,
“clight” and “zight” are not actual English words, they could in principle be English words,
in a way that “vlight”, “dnight”, “ptight” could never be. This is because only certain consonant clusters can serve as onsets for a valid English syllable (Halle, 1978). Note that
phonotactic constraints are language specific and must be learned on the basis of experience. Remarkably, 9-month-old infants have been shown to be sensitive to the phonotactic
constraints of their native languages (Jusczyk, Friederici, et al. 1993; Jusczyk, Luca, &
Charles-Luce, 1994; Mattys, Jusczyk, Luce, & Morgan, 1999; Mattys & Jusczyk, 2001).
Phonotactic knowledge may be useful for word segmentation in two ways. First, the
infant may directly use phonotactic constraints to segment words: e.g., in a sound sequence
that contains “vt”, which is not a possible English onset or coda, the learner may conclude
that ‘a word boundary must be postulated between “v” and “t”. Some complications arise,
though, for the learner must be able to distinguish consonant sequences that belong to two
adjacent syllables within a same word from those that belong to two words altogether. For example, “mb” is not a valid English onset or coda, but it does not necessarily indicate word
boundary: a word such as “embed” consists of two syllables that span over the consonant
sequence.
We believe that the use of phonotactic knowledge in word segmentation is less direct.
The tacit assumption underlying all discussion on word segmentation is that words consist
of syllables, which in turn consist of more primitive units of onset (a sequence of consonants) and rime, which in turn consists of the nucleus vowel and coda (also a sequence of
consonants). Phonotactic constraints specify the well-formedness of syllables in a particular
language, and they enable the child to parse speech segments (consonants and vowels) into
syllables. This step of syllabification is necessary for further development of word segmentation and other aspects of the phonological system. In this sense, phonotactic constraints
are logical priors to strategies such as Metrical Stress and statistical learning, as both require
learner to treat the syllable as the basic unit of information. For example, the infant learner
apparently keeps track of transitional probabilities over adjacent syllables, rather than arbitrary phonological units. Syllabification also allows the learner to identify the metrical
pattern of her language, as it is standardly assumed that the syllable is the stress-bearing
unit.
It seems rather straightforward to learn phonotactic constraints if the learner has knowledge of syllabic structures–and therefore knows where to find phonotactic constraints. It
suffices to pay attention to utterance-initial (before the first vowel) and utterance-final (after the last vowel) consonant sequences to learn the valid onsets and codas respectively.
Eventually, and probably quickly, the infant will have seen all–in English, a few dozens–
possible forms of onsets and codas. This simple method of learning may explain children’s
rapid acquisition of non-native phonotactic regularities from brief exposure in laboratory
settings (Onishi, Chambers, & Fisher, 2002; Chambers, Onishi, & Fisher, 2003)
2.5 Allophonic and articulatory cues
A somewhat more subtle cue for word segmentation comes from the context-dependent
allophonic variations. For instance, the allophone /t/ in English is aspirated at the beginning
of a word such as “tab”, but is unaspirated at the end of a word such as “cat”. If the child
is sensitive to how allophonic distributions correlate with wordhood, this could be a useful
guide for finding word boundaries. Also of use is the degree of coarticulation of adjacent
phonemes (Liberman, Cooper, Shankweiler, & Studdert-Kennedy, 1967), which varies as a
complex function of their positions within or across syllable/word boundaries (Ladefoged,
